From Hansel minutes.com. It's
Hansel minutes, a weekly discussion
with web developer and technologists.
Scott Hanselman hosted by Carl Franklin.
This is Lawrence Ryan announcing show
number 87. Recorded live Thursday,
November 2nd, 2007. Support for Hanselman it's
as provided by Tellerik rad
controls. The most comprehensive suite
of components for windows forms
and asp.net web applications. online@wwwdottelerik.com.
Support is also provided by.net
developers journal. The world's leading
that net developer magazine online
at www dot  dot
com. In this episode, Scott
talks about using Google earth,
virtual earth and SketchUp to
visualize a new home. Hi,
this is Scott Hanselman, and
this is another episode of
Hansel minutes. This was going
to include Carl Franklin, but it
turns out that the day
I was taping this, there
were some lanes closed down
on the highway, near Carl's
house, and it looks like
there was a pretty bad
accident and he's unable to
get to the studio. So
it's going to be me
by myself. Hopefully I won't
bore you too much without
my partner in crime. And
what I'm gonna be talking
about today is some of
the work that you're doing
on a house that we
built and how we used
Google earth and virtual earth
and SketchUp to, to model
that house. Basically we've built,
we built a house, we
work with a builder. We
work with an architect and
we started with a basic
plan and then kind of
modified that plan and worked
within that plan. You know,
whether it be moving walls
or turning the house a
certain way, facing a certain
direction, changing porches, changing rooms,
adding walls, things like that.
And this was in a,
in a lot, in an
area of, of Oregon where
we live, where there really
wasn't any what really wasn't
anything. I mean, it was
a big, giant empty field
out in the middle of
nowhere next to a big
Hill. So for me, it
was a little difficult to
visualize a lot of this
stuff. So there were a
couple of steps to this
process. And what I want
to talk about is how
we use technology to help
us understand these things. So
the, the neighborhood, we first,
I found that plot, this
area that we were going
to be be in, in
Google earth, I used the
Google earth download application, the
downloaded application, that's the full
kind of direct X three
D version that a lot
of you have seen. You
can also do this in
virtual virtual earth. And I'll
talk about it a little
bit, that some of the
difference between the two in
this particular instance, the imagery
that I was using was
quite a few years old.
So not only was I
seeing the big empty lot,
but a lot of the
houses that were built around
the area where we're not
there because we were looking
at a satellite image that
was at least 18 months
old, if not a little,
a little older. So I
found this on Google earth
and I put down a
push pin to basically keep
track of where I was
going to help me visualize
my lot. And I went
and talked to the builder
and they gave us a
PDF file. That was basically
a plan of the neighborhood.
This is what the neighborhood
is going to look like
in three, four years when
they've sold all the lots.
And it gave us an
idea of where the roads
were going to go, whether
where the lot was going
to be about the size
of the lot and the
general facing of the, of
the house and what the
options were about, where we're
gonna be able to put
that house. So I brought
this PDF down and depending
on whether you're using Adobe
Acrobat or Fox, and you
can copy that PDF as
a bitmap, or you can
do an idea, which is
just take a screenshot. So
I took a screenshot of
this flyer and it included
the logo and information that
I didn't want. Cause it
was literally was a printed
out flyer that had a,
a layout of that. Ideally
I would have got the
source vectors, but this was
a, this whole operation is
very quick and dirty. Then
I brought that into my
favorite paint program, which is
definitely paint.net. And if you
haven't used paint.net, you need
to, it's a www.getpaint.net. And
it's a great application of
a windows forms, app app
written entirely in.net. Microsoft eventually
hired the guy. It's amazing
application. You know, the only
thing that it doesn't do
that I could have used
is this concept of a
free transform. And I'll talk
about that in a second.
That's the one thing I
needed would need Photoshop for,
but I found a couple
of ways to get around
that. So I did the
screenshot of the layout of
the neighborhood and I pasted
it into paint.net and I
pasted it on a layer
of its own, keeping a
transparency below it. So the
background was transparent, but I
pasted this big map on
the screen. And then I
started deleting things. I started
using the selection tool to
delete portions of this I
didn't want. And because it
was on a separate layer
and there was transparency behind
it, which is represented in
most paint programs, including paint.net
as a checkerboard pattern. So
when you see the checkerboard,
you know, that things are
transparent. I would just keep
deleting. I ended up using
an eraser. I use the
magic wand selection tool. I
used anything that I could
to basically punch out this,
this neighborhood layout. So I
had a transparent layout. And
then you want to save
that as a PNG cause
PNGs have that extra alpha
layer. You've got RGB plus
alpha. And the alpha is
a transparency layer that also
gives you 255 levels of
transparency. So just like RGB,
give you zero to two
55 values of red, green,
and blue adding that alpha
layer, which is available in
P and G and a
couple other formats, but certainly
not in JPEG, that's going
to make it. So when
we import our map, it's
going to look nice. So
then we go into Google
into the Google earth desktop
application, and I say, add
image overlay, which is inside
of the Google or Google
earth application, pulling this off
the menu. You say, add
image overlay. And then we
select that PNG. Now, you
know, you did it right.
If you can't see any
of the edges of the
white and of the logos
or anything like that came
in from whatever you're trying
to import. Now, in this
case, I'm importing a picture
of a neighborhood. This could
be another texture, or it
could be a picture that
you've drawn or whatever. It
could be a logo. It
doesn't necessarily have to be
a map like I've done.
Now, when you've got this
overlaid image sitting in Google
earth, oftentimes it will come
in at the wrong size.
It'll come in about the
size, you see it on
the screen. So you can
mitigate that by zooming in
really far into a Google
earth and trying to get
a one to one relationship
by orienting Google earth in
the same way. But I
found that to be really
difficult. Instead, you can look
in the places pain, which
is usually on the left
side of the Googler screen.
And you can find that
overlay cause it'll appear as
a place. Anything that you
put into Google earth, whether
it be a model or
an image will show up
in your tree view, there
you can then right. Click
on it and go properties.
And then you can see
the transparency values. You can
see the altitude, how far
up in the air is
this, is this thing floating
or is it actually sitting
on the earth itself? So
then by manipulating these values,
you can kind of resize
your, your image. It's important
to note though, that you're
not actually resizing the image,
but rather you are kind
of changing Googlers perception of
it. So this is an
image manipulation and the classic,
this many pixels by this
many pixels perspective, this is
about where in the latitude
and longitude does this thing
fit and, and how much
space is it going to
occupy if you get it
right, then you can close
the properties dialogue, and you
can move Google around in
three dimensions and see how
your, your lot diagram fits
on top of that at
big empty lot and Google
earth. This is a really
valuable technique. I think for
a real estate agent. Now
I'm not a real estate
guy, but because I've been
playing a lot with these
kinds of technologies, I have
this kind of feeling, and
this is a little bit
of an egotistical thing, but
I have this feeling that
if I was a real
estate agent, man, I could
really tear it up because
I would be the real
estate agent that would come
with a big ass laptop.
Sit down in your living
room, model, the house show
you different neighborhoods. We do
like 3d flyovers. I don't
know if that would impress
me if I was buying
a house. I don't know
if that would necessarily impress
the other people. I'm sure
there's lots of aspects of
real estate that have nothing
to do with that. But
I sure feel like I
would be impressed if I
could do that. I had
a real estate agent recently
on another house that we
had as a rental and
he did the entire transaction
on a tablet PC, and
he wasn't that technical, but
he just really liked the
idea of not having paper.
So we were just signing
TIF files and using the
windows fax and scan. He'd
done the whole, he come
up with a whole workflow
based entirely on TIFF files
and it was just a
very cool experience. And then
at the end, he gave
me an encrypted CD rom
with my, my documents on
it more and more. We're
seeing that actually, when we,
when we finished closing on
this house, which was through
a larger company, we received
a, a CD rom with,
with those files encrypted on
it. I thought that was
pretty slick. Now, in this
instance, I'm using Google earth
to lay overlay this, this
imagery, and I'm seeing a
pretty old satellite image. So
I went over to Microsoft
virtual earth. You can get
to that from virtual earth.com
or maps.live.com. They've got those
helicopter flyovers. So then I
can actually look at a
helicopter fly over of the
area or airplane or drone,
some kind of Ninja airplane
that flew over and took
pictures of the area from
a much, much lower altitude.
And these are done kind
of an a, an isometric
view. There are there a
specific angle, so they're very
regular these images. So then
you can use in paint.net,
the rotate zoom tool. It's
not the free transform what
the free transform lets you
do. And the free transform
is something that people are
begging for paint.net to have
maybe the listen to this
podcast and will help us
out. But basically it allows
you to grab the handles
of something that you've selected.
So you can draw a
square rubber band and then
grab a handle. And then
as you move, it basically
transform it to fit into
a three dimensional space. You
can skew it any way
that you want. You can
do similar stuff with the
rotate zoom, the rotate zoom
tool basically gives you a
picture of a three dimensional
ball that you can then
turn and, and then change
the perspective that we are
looking at that particular image.
It's a little unrefined, but
it allowed me to, to
do this, this virtual earth
where I basically turned at
30 degrees and viewed my
layout, my lot layout in
a much better, a much
better piece of imagery. So
the point that I'm trying
to make is that I
guess I'm disappointed that it's
so difficult for someone like
my mom or my, you
know, on nontechnical kind of
archetypal person to take something
like a PDF extract, an
image out of it and
get that into an application
like Google earth. I mean,
Google earth goes out of
its way to make this
available to you. But even
the, even the basic concept
of like layers and something
like paintbrush doesn't exist. So
you have to go and
put paint.net on the machine.
So the barrier to entry
just for basic image manipulation
is, is too much because
even layers aren't available to
the average Joe, unless they
go looking for an image
manipulation program, but then also
the idea of taking a
screenshot, cropping it punching out
transparency. The barrier to entry
is really great. It seems
very intuitive to the alpha
geek to the person who
gets this, but I'm still,
haven't quite figured out how
I'm going to explain this
to someone other than teaching
them by rote and saying,
well, just, just do this
step by step. Here's how
it works. When I think
that it's the why that
makes it so interesting. Why
does this work? Why is
this possible? So then the
next step, which happened a
little bit later when we
actually picked our lot picked
our lot picked our layout,
and then we needed to
do some kind of architectural
changes and we had the
architect draw up what we
wanted the house to look
like. And then I taught
the real estate agent how
to use this Google SketchUp
program. It's a fantastic application.
It's completely turned three D
modeling on its head. I
did some three D modeling
about 10 years ago and
it was tedious at best.
It was very, very difficult.
I found it to be
very frustrating. I ended up,
I did some AutoCAD as
well, and I found AutoCAD
and doing machining to be
a lot more intuitive than
some of the three D
modeling applications are out there.
The SketchUp has a different
perspective on doing things because
it has this inference engine.
It has this notion of
inferring what the user might
want to do, because it's
going to use the view
that you have of a
three dimensional object, whether it
be a top view or
side view or coming in
from an isometric perspective. And
it infers what you are
trying to do, whether you,
whether you've put your pencil
on an intersection of a
line, whether you've put your
pencil on the face of
a particular object or on
its edge. And it's basically
guessing correctly, it's inferring that
well, he clearly, he or
she clearly means to do
this because they have put
the mouse here. And the
view is in that way.
So basically using the eye,
the, the way that we
think about three dimensions, you
know, to our benefits. So
I worked with my, my
real estate agent who is
kind of a, not, not
a geek, but he definitely
has the geek potential and
showed him how to use
SketchUp and explain how we
can take our architectural documents,
our architectural diagram, which has
done a classic style and
then scan it, take that
architectural diagram. And just as
we talked earlier, where I
put a, a lot diagram
and took that piece of
texture and then overlayed it
in Google earth, we can
then take that plan, that
architectural plan, and then lay
it out on a layer
inside of SketchUp. So we're
basically going to trace the
bottom floor of the house.
SketchUp lets you draw lines.
And then in the lower
right corner in the status
bar, it shows you the
number of inches and feet
that that line is. And
of course you can change
that to different measurement units.
And then you can type
in the number from the
architectural diagram so that you
can say, I want this
to be this wall to
be exactly 25 feet, three
inches, because that's what the
diagram is. And then as
you connect those lines, it
will then infer that, Oh,
he's, he's drawn a complete
closed shape that is now
a two dimensional plane. Once
it's created that plane, that
that object has some solidity,
suddenly a bunch of lines
becomes a face. And then
that's where the power of
SketchUp gets. It gets going
because then you can take
that face and then grab
it and pull on it
and extrude a two dimensional
object into three dimensional space.
So it's literally a progression
from one dimensional, two dimensional,
three dimensional. If you take
a point and turn it
into a line, align into
a two dimensional phase and
then extrude into something more.
So then if I had
like a draw square pole
on the face, I get
a cube. Maybe I would
draw a small rectangle to
indicate a door, select it
and then hit delete. And
suddenly I've got a hole
in my model. It's that?
It's that easy. So we
drew the house, we actually
did the first floor, second
floor and the roof separately
and then stack them on
to each other. That that
felt easier to us. I
know that there's lots of
people who know a lot
more about SketchUp and a
lot smarter about SketchUp than
we are, but that really
seemed intuitive to us because
it let us each deal
with the, the Flores separately,
do the texturing and whatnot,
which we'll talk about in
a second within that. Now
there are some advanced features
in SketchUp that we had
a little trouble with, but
you can do animations. You
can do Y you know,
fly overs and walkthroughs and
spent, you know, look at
the front, elevation the side
elevation. I know that there's
a SketchUp pro program that,
that real structural engineers that
know what they're doing can
use it as a lot
more features. But SketchUp free
is just a community supported
thing that you can download.
You can use for, you
know, not just modeling something
like a house, but you
could model any do it
yourself project that you're working
on, or even an addition
to your house laying out
your backyard. You know, it's
really flexible. Now building the
wire frame was fairly straight
forward and we had this
kind of big white empty
house, but then SketchUp has
this notion of materials and
they've got a whole materials
library. You can also go
online and download additional bonus
materials. And those materials are
things like Cedar shakes, textures,
concrete, roofing, all the kinds
of textures that you see
in life. And we also
took a few pictures of,
of specific things like Cedar
shakes and certain textures of
wood and made sure that
they were repeating. And then
you just select the texture
and paint it with a,
a standard fill tool. And
then once we started to
paint this house, it really
became something, something real. It
went from just being a
wireframe to being very solid
and then sketch up, includes
a little, a little man
who sits in the corner
there. And it's basically he's
the six foot tall reference
point. So once we modeled
that, we went back over
to Google earth. Remember earlier
in Google earth, we put
the, the layout of the
lot. We overlayed that inside
of Google earth on the
actual location of the lot.
And then there is the
feature in SketchUp where there's
a, a relationship between the
two programs, basically Google earth
and SketchUp talk to each
other. So you find the
spot in Google earth where
you're going to do this
work. You're going to put
your model in there. And
this is kind of on
a counterintuitive to me because
what I thought I was
supposed to do, it was
going to sketch up and
then say file export and
go into Google earth and
say file import. And while
that worked, I had a
heck of a time positioning
my house. I think I
ended up throwing it down
somewhere in the middle of
Kansas, which is not where
I live. Instead. SketchUp has
these toolbar buttons for get
current image from Google earth
and place image, which is
really very clever. You go
on Google earth, you find
the spot where your house
should be. Then you say,
get images from Google earth,
basically get the current location,
get the current view. Then
they talk to each other
cross process. And then inside
of your SketchUp model, temporarily
comes a black and white
texture that represents Google Earth's
position. It appears on the
floor of your diagram. Then
within SketchUp, you place your
house using the tools and
SketchUp that you're familiar with.
Then you say place, object,
view your model and Google
earth. And then it automatically
kind of automates Google earth,
X and SketchUp expert in
the documents as an appropriate
model, importing into Google earth
and placing it, placing it
with terms of orientation, as
well as altitude. A couple
of times, my house ended
up being a few feet
underground because one of the
things that we didn't build
in our house was an
actual basement. We didn't put
in any kind of a
foundation. The house itself doesn't
have a basement, but every
house has a foundation. So
if I were to do
this again differently, I would
probably add about a three
to four foot big old
chunk of concrete block that
this thing would sit on
because right now my house
in the virtual world is
about six inches underground. So
then in Google earth, we
positioned that, turned it a
certain way. And then I
went to the house, went
to the actual house, which
is now bite me last
week was built. And I
took a picture standing in
front of the house. I
went back over to Google
earth, turned it around and
kind of move the camera
in an appropriate way to
get as close as I
could to that same position,
just to prove the model
that we had done earlier
looked in fact like the
real house. And it did
a couple of things, looked
a little different as far
as the number of columns
and stuff. And I'll, we'll
have a link up on
the handsome and it's site
for you to see the
differences between these two things.
But it didn't take a
lot of effort. I mean,
a couple of days work
early on in the process
really helped my wife and
I visualize it helped us
pick colors for the rooms
because we could see what
those colors, you know, kind
of what it would kind
of look like. Interestingly enough,
when you're sitting in one
room and you glance over
and you look through the
door and you see the
color on the wall in
the other room, that kind
of has an effect. That's
a fairly subtle aesthetic that
you wouldn't notice unless you
actually painted the house ahead
of time with Google earth
and this the SketchUp program,
you can actually walk through
the house like quake style.
You can it into walk
mode. You can move around
from place to place and
then turn around and see
through the door into the
other room. And maybe you
see the colors that you
put there. So you can
see if a color in
one room clashes with a
color and another. So a
little bit of effort invested
upfront, being able to walk
through the house in a
virtual sense, allowed us to
make decisions that we needed
that were permanent decisions about
where rooms were laid out
so that when the nine
month process, the much longer
process of actually building the
house happened, we felt confident
in those decisions. And it
didn't take much of an
investment. I mean, I'm not
a three D modeler by
any means. My, my real
estate agent is just, you
know, a guy who was
having a lot of fun
modeling in 3d, but the,
that, that interaction between Google
earth, between paint.net, between Acrobat
green SketchUp, I felt really
worked very, very well. Once
we understood some of the
basic concepts about transparency, about
what's transparent. What's not about
orientation getting our heads around
3d. It was a really
useful thing. And I really
encourage people to take a
look at all of those
applications, Google earth, paint.net, Google
SketchUp. I'll put links to
all of this on the
Hanselman at site. And you
can certainly go up on
my site and search for
sketchup@hanselman.com and check that out.
Well, that's been my lone
Wolf edition of Hansel minutes
without Carl this week. Just
talking to myself into this
big microphone for your pleasure.
I hope you enjoyed this
again. I'm not much of
an expert when it comes
to Google earth and SketchUp,
and I did have a
lot of fun and I
encourage you to check it
out and I hope you
as well. We'll see you
next week on Hanson. .